# Acknowledgment of Citizen Scientists on Research Outputs

**Providing credit where it’s due, and how to achieve the ‘Reuse’ principle with
information on data provenance.**

By Georgia Ward-Fear, Macquarie University, ORCID iD:
[0000-0002-4808-1933](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4808-1933), e-mail:
<georgia.ward-fear@mq.edu.au> Article DOI:
[10.25815/rkzw-z561](https://doi.org/10.25815/rkzw-z561)

![](media/4647766d5b1bf42daa447d255fe9f2f5.jpg)

Image: The Balanggarra Rangers from the East Kimberley region of Northern
Australia. Image courtesy of Kimberley Land Council.

The ‘Reuse’ component of the FAIR principles dictates that data should maintain
its initial complexity and have clear provenance information on how and with
whom the data was formed. This, coupled with discipline-specific data and
metadata standards, allows for data reuse in the future. Citizen science
projects present unique challenges for accommodating the Reuse principle. This
is because there is currently no single or standardised way for crediting
citizen science collaborators on publications or datasets, citing collaborative
works or providing Intellectual Property (IP) rights to the citizen scientists
involved. Depending on the methodology used by the authors (or imposed by
research journals), data provenance can thus be a subjective and sometimes
mis-represented aspect of research involving citizen scientists.

Official acknowledgment for contribution to research is a cornerstone of
academia and researchers should strive always to credit citizen scientists in
appropriate ways. There are myriad benefits to official acknowledgment, some of
which may only apply to the citizen science groups (e.g., unique funding
opportunities; support to create formal structures around the citizen science
group). In a collaborative project, citizen scientists/groups can be credited
via the official acknowledgements, or via authorship on manuscripts/datasets.
The latter often requires justification that citizen scientists have met the
International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) standards which
warrant academic authorship. Citizen science does not always lend itself to
meeting these rigorous academic criteria. The case study below outlines a common
situation in this respect and the diversity of considerations (cultural, legal,
ethical) when deciding the best form of acknowledgement for citizen science
collaborators.

## Project Highlight: Lizard Conservation with the Balanggarra Rangers in Australia

![](media/905eadf03146674e331d9bbecac32879.jpg)

Image: Herbert and Wesley Alberts with Georgia Ward-Fear. Photo by Georgia
Ward-Fear.

To mitigate the impact of an invasive toad on a native apex predator in tropical
Australia, a collaboration between conservation researchers and indigenous
Traditional Owners (the Balanngarra Rangers, of the Balanggarra people) was
formed. Each group brought their unique skills, experience, and knowledge to the
project; an excellent example of the synergy between ‘Western science’ and
Traditional Ecological Knowledge and skills. The research was highly successful
and culminated in the development of a new national and international
conservation strategy. The Balanggarra Rangers were pivotal to the success of
this project in unique ways, yet crediting the Rangers was not simple. The group
consisted of many individuals with varying degrees of input, and the group
wanted to be identified collectively by their cultural name. However, adding the
‘Balanggarra Rangers’ to the author byline was rejected by some scientific
publishing outlets due to editorial or ethical protocols, or because the
Rangers’ lacked academic affiliation. Even those that did, reduced the author
name to ‘B. Rangers’ in citations, an unintended but nevertheless culturally
inappropriate practice. This experience motivated the researchers to petition
for more inclusive academic authorship protocols that keep pace with the
changing socio-political nature of research. ‘Group co-authorship’ is an option
for including citizen science groups as authors, providing strong public
acknowledgment and Intellectual Property rights. It also avoids some of the
ethical pitfalls for adding individuals by name, who have not met ICMJE
guidelines (which can be viewed as academic fraudulence). A summary of the
suggested qualifiers for citizen science group authorship can be found in the
infobox.

Research programs that engage with citizen scientists should identify the most
appropriate method for credit at the outset. Not only is this ethical, but also
helps to explore and achieve legal interoperability early on, i.e., the ability
of organisations with different legal frameworks to work together. This may be
especially pertinent in citizen science projects where disparate organisations,
industry sectors or subsets of the community come together in a research
setting. When assessing the best way to credit citizen scientists in a project,
these are some of the questions to consider:

1.  What are the wishes of the citizen scientists involved in the program?

2.  Is the citizen science group readily identifiable by a collective name or
    could they create one?

3.  Is the dataset in use ‘static’ (i.e., finished, whole and attributable to
    one group), is this a ‘living’ dataset and/or is only a portion of it being
    used?

4.  Is it ethical or appropriate to identify individual citizen scientists by
    name?

5.  Which form of citizen scientist identification will best support the ‘Reuse’
    principle?

### References

Ward-Fear, Georgia, Balanggarra Rangers, David Pearson, Melissa Bruton, and Rick
Shine. “Sharper Eyes See Shyer Lizards: Collaboration with Indigenous Peoples
Can Alter the Outcomes of Conservation Research.” Conservation Letters 12, no. 4
(July 2019). <https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12643>.

Ward-Fear, Georgia, Gregory B. Pauly, Jann E. Vendetti, and Richard Shine.
“Authorship Protocols Must Change to Credit Citizen Scientists.” Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 35, no. 3 (March 2020): 187–90.  
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2019.10.007>.

Hunter, Jane, and Chih-Hsiang Hsu. “Formal Acknowledgement of Citizen
Scientists’ Contributions via Dynamic Data Citations.” In Digital Libraries:
Providing Quality Information, edited by Robert B. Allen, Jane Hunter, and
Marcia L. Zeng, 9469:64–75. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2015.  
<https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-27974-9_7>.

## Group Co-authorship for Citizen Scientists: Recommendations for Using, Listing, and Citing

Group co-authorship should be used:

1.  When the group in question expresses a desire for authorship.

2.  When groups cannot meet ICMJE or journal specific standards but their
    contribution was deemed essential to the success of the project. For citizen
    science projects, this should include ‘data acquisition’, which would not
    normally warrant authorship alone.

3.  Only for established groups (e.g., the ‘Balanggarra Rangers’) not for
    amorphous groups who engage with generic surveys or medical studies. Such
    groups are best recognised in the Acknowledgment section.

Group co-author names should:

1.  Be as short as possible, and

2.  be listed in full at all times (e.g., ‘Balanggarra Rangers’ not ‘B.
    Rangers’) i.e., both in the author byline and also when citing and indexing
    in references. This is also the responsibility of the publisher and indexing
    programs/institutions.

All authors collectively decide:

1.  On the best form of acknowledgment and whether it meets the ‘Reuse’
    principle.

2.  The most appropriate order of authorship (groups co-authors can be anywhere
    in that order).

3.  Whether to list individual citizen scientist names elsewhere in the text
    (e.g., supplementary materials or appendices), remembering that some citizen
    scientists may be eligible for individual authorship independent of the
    group. Group co-authorship doesn’t replace this option.

Adapted from Ward-Fear et al. 2020
