# Project Highlight: The INOS Project

Article DOI: [10.25815/aayw-w097](https://doi.org/10.25815/aayw-w097)

The INOS project is funded under the Erasmus+ KA2 Strategic Partnerships program
and aims at integrating open science and citizen science into active learning
approaches in Higher Education. INOS is a partnership of four universities
(Aalborg University, Tallinn University, University of Oulu, University of
Bordeaux), an SME (Web2Learn) and LIBER the Association of European Research
Libraries.

### Upskilling through open knowledge activities

In its three year duration and among its other goals and activities, INOS aims
to expose academic and library staff and students to participatory methods in
fostering open science, and consequently upskill them, so that they reflect on
updating pedagogical models in Higher Education through citizen science. It does
so by encouraging universities and university libraries to co-create and
participate in Open Knowledge and Open Innovation activities. In this context
LIBER co-organised four Open Knowledge Activities (OKAs) with five LIBER
participant libraries and with the support of the LIBER Citizen Science Working
Group and the LIBER Copyright and Legal Matters Working Group. The LIBER OKAs
aimed at co-creating and debating on citizen science concepts, thus upskilling
the participants in open and citizen science.

### Towards a Roadmap on Capacity Building on Open Science and Citizen Science for Research Libraries — Co-creating a vision

Building up on the project’s overall intellectual outputs and activities, LIBER
is leading activities on engagement, awareness raising and fostering policy
change. In this framework, LIBER has recently organised two highly interactive
vision-building workshops that led to the publication of a report on co-creating
a vision for citizen science in higher education. This activity, together with
the previous OKAs, are the starting point for a workshop dedicated to research
libraries, aiming to co-create a Roadmap on Capacity Building on Open Science
and Citizen Science for Research Libraries. The project will wrap up its
activities with a report the the final Stakeholders’ Consultation of the project
and its final Vision and Policy Recommendations for Higher Education.

Web: <https://inos-project.eu/>

![](media/9c4079443feda8dcd3166614580e12e3.jpg)

![](media/9c4079443feda8dcd3166614580e12e3.jpg)
