# Definitions

In infection control and population protection, many terms and abbreviations are
used whose meaning is not always immediately evident. The Robert Koch Institute
(RKI) and the Federal Office for Civil Protection and Disaster Assistance (BBK)
explain common technical terms.

The RKI website provides definitions, notes and interpretations (in German only)
on [specialist terms in infection control and
epidemiology](https://www.rki.de/DE/Content/Service/Publikationen/Fachwoerterbuch_Infektionsschutz.pdf).

In Germany, 'population protection' is used as a generic term to refer to all
tasks and measures for disaster risk management performed by municipalities and
federal states, and for civil protection performed by the national government.
The BBK has published a practitioner's glossary (in German only) defining
[selected key terms in population
protection](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Praxis_Bevoelkerungsschutz/Glossar_2018.pdf).

Important in the context of the spread of the coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 are the
definitions of the following terms:

## Outbreak

Sudden increase in the incidence of disease, either localised or scattered,
which exceeds the incidence of that disease which would be expected at that
time, in that place and in that population, and for which a common source or an
epidemic link is highly probable or proven. In other words, an outbreak
comprises an increased incidence of a disease that can be traced to a common
cause.

Where several cases meet the same diagnostic criteria and an epidemiological
link exists, the term outbreak is applied. In cases of major clinical and
epidemiological significance (rare and dangerous diseases), isolated infections
may sometimes also be described as 'outbreaks'. There is no sharp distinction
between the terms 'outbreak' and 'epidemic', nor is there a fundamental
difference, because an epidemic in this sense is a major outbreak.

-   **Secondary outbreak** A further outbreak in the vicinity of a known
    outbreak where a link exists (e.g. outbreaks linked within a family or in a
    community institution).

-   **Satellite outbreak** A small outbreak that is causally linked to larger
    events far away.

## Endemic

Continuous occurrence (no time limit) of a disease or a pathogen in a certain
region or a certain population. Within the population in a given region, all
persons have a similar risk of contracting the disease.

## Epidemic

Wave of illness of epidemic proportions; the number of cases of illness that
share the same aetiology increases relative to the baseline. The process is
limited to a specific period of time and a specific place.

## Pandemic

The occurrence of a new global spread of an infectious disease with a high
number of infections, usually also involving severe illness, over a limited
period of time. If human to human transmission continues e.g. as a result of a
novel influenza virus, the World Health Organization may 'declare' a pandemic in
accordance with the International Health Regulations.

Irrespective of whether it goes on to declare a pandemic, the World Health
Organization may already declare a public health emergency of international
concern e.g. when a novel human pathogen or another acute health hazard arises.
