# Communications

Good communications are a key component of successful crisis management. Here we
need to distinguish between (1) 'internal' communications within the
administrative/crisis team, which is governed by the official regulations of the
team, and (2) 'external' communications. Internal communications are covered in
the chapter 'Operational planning'. This chapter describes 'external'
communications with the public.

Here we draw a distinction between 'risk communication' and 'crisis
communication'. 'Risk communication' refers to communication before a crisis
arises. 'Crisis communication' becomes necessary once the crisis occurs. Good
risk communication makes it considerably easier to communicate during the
crisis, because it creates knowledge on which crisis management can build.

The [Guidelines on crisis
communication](https://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/downloads/DE/publikationen/themen/bevoelkerungsschutz/leitfaden-krisenkommunikation.pdf)
published (in German only) by Germany's Federal Ministry of the Interior,
Building and Community (BMI) provides a clear overview of the following topics
for effective communication:

1.  Risk communication

2.  Crisis communication

3.  Target-group appropriate crisis communication

4.  Crisis communication plan

5.  Planning aids

Good communication can enable the public, media representatives and public
authorities to become an effective team for managing a crisis.

## Risk communication

The aim of risk communication is to build up the mutual confidence and trust of
all stakeholders. This is best achieved by forming long-term relationships.
These are the basis for credibility, which is essential in a crisis. Risk
communication therefore relies on transparency, reliability and maximum honesty.
Accordingly, risk communication is a continuous process. Public authorities
should therefore look upon it and use it as a

>   'sharing of information and opinions on risks, risk prevention, risk
>   minimisation and risk acceptance' (Federal Office for Civil Protection and
>   Disaster Assistance 2011),

that involves all stakeholders.

This particularly important when the public are to be motivated to themselves
perform risk management. One example of crisis preparedness is the brochure
published by the BBK entitled [Guidance on emergency
preparedness](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Broschueren_Flyer/Buergerinformationen_A4/Ratgeber_Brosch.pdf)
[](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Broschueren_Flyer/Buergerinformationen_A4/Ratgeber_Brosch.pdf)[and
what to do in an
emergency](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Broschueren_Flyer/Buergerinformationen_A4/Ratgeber_Brosch.pdf)
(German only), which contains important information and checklists

>   'on all key topics – from food supplies to the emergency bag – for personal
>   emergency preparedness' (Federal Office for Civil Protection and Disaster
>   Assistance, 2018).

Only preventive communication will enable a crisis response that is able to draw
on the preparedness and knowledge in place without delay.

One example of the need for risk communication is the shortage of resources
described in this manual, which in this instance involves the distribution of
medicines. As long as there is no risk to their health, any individual will
understand and accept that medical personnel who have to take care of the first
patients must be protected first. So must the personnel responsible for
maintaining critical infrastructures or public safety. For work within your own
office, this can mean establishing before a crisis occurs which tasks that are
otherwise an important part of routines can be deprioritised during the crisis.

One of the challenges for risk communication is that the perception of risk is
influenced by many factors. This can mean that major risks are underestimated
and minor risks overestimated, with the result that the measures undertaken by
public health offices are seen as either excessive or insufficient, Here is an
example: A vaccination is refused because of the fear of extremely rare side
effects, and the much higher risk of severe illness through infection is
implicitly accepted. If dangerous diseases occur only rarely due to high
vaccination rates, separating the risk-benefit calculations for the individual
and for society becomes particularly challenging.

How a particular risk is communicated also plays a crucial role in how it is
perceived. For example, various studies indicate that with respect to the
likelihood of occurrence, relative figures often lead to a higher assessment of
the risk than absolute figures (Wegwarth, Odette; Gigerenzer, Gerd 2011). How a
message is put across can also lead to a misjudgement of the damage that will be
done. This plays an especially major role with biological emergencies, in which
the extent of damage depends on so many factors that it is almost impossible to
assess. This uncertainty must also be communicated. For example, strategic plans
for dealing with a 30% absence of personnel have led to the firm belief that
roughly 30% of people fall ill in any pandemic.

The timing of risk communication can also affect the perception of risk.
Publication of such emergency-related information therefore needs to be placed
in the context of a risk assessment which makes clear to the target audience
whether the information is of a general nature and of no current relevance, or
whether it is designed to prepare recipients for an incident expected in the
near future. As well as building long-term trust and confidence, risk
communication can also be used in the short term in case of assumed, foreseeable
risks (e.g. extreme weather events) to

>   'raise public awareness of forthcoming events and prepare measures to warn
>   and protect the public,

as the BBK writes in its glossary [Selected key terms
in](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Praxis_Bevoelkerungsschutz/Glossar_2018.pdf)
[](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Praxis_Bevoelkerungsschutz/Glossar_2018.pdf)[public
protection](https://www.bbk.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/BBK/DE/Publikationen/Praxis_Bevoelkerungsschutz/Glossar_2018.pdf)'
(German only).

## Crisis communication

Unlike risk communication, which focuses on crisis preparedness, crisis
communication involves

>   'sharing information and opinions during a crisis in order to prevent or
>   limit damage to a protected good' (Federal Office for Civil Protection and
>   Disaster Assistance, 2011).

Crisis communication must ensure that all responsible persons/bodies have the
same level of information and knowledge. Equally, the media and the general
public must be informed as truthfully, transparently and promptly as possible.

Crisis communication aims to provide a sufficient amount of specific information
in good time, so that the measures needed to protect the population can be
taken. To avoid uncertainty an agreed language regime is required, which all
stakeholders must adhere to. This is why crisis communication also needs to be
planned in advance.

If communication is poorly timed or if conflicting information is transmitted,
there is a risk of excessive misinformation and false rumours that in the worst
case may lead to hysteria or panic. The initial reactions may already be crucial
in determining whether the organisational structures lose control of how the
crisis develops.

**N.B.: To maintain control over communication, please therefore apply the
following principles:**

1.  **Act, don't react**

2.  **Release only reliable information, and explain any areas of uncertainty**

3.  **Maintain contact and be accessible**

## Press and media work

In a crisis, external communication must be clearly regulated. The press and the
media need permanent contact persons. Information may only be communicated to
the public by authorised persons who are specially trained to perform this task.
People making enquiries must be referred to authorised communicators. Specialist
expertise does not automatically entail an ability to communicate it
comprehensibly. In public administrations, press work is usually managed through
a press office. This press office must be called in.

Since the public expect the authorities to provide timely assistance, give
assurances and function efficiently, dealing with uncertainties – which often
exist when a crisis begins – is a particular challenge. To maintain trust and
confidence, this uncertainty must be communicated. At the same time the
authorities must identify the measures that will be taken to clarify the
uncertainties and say when they expect further information to be available.

When preparing for a press conference it is important not only to prepare the
information that the authorities intend to communicate, but also to consider
what information the press would like to have. If the media representatives do
not receive answers to their questions from the authorised persons they will
look for other 'experts' to provide answers. For highly complex and specialised
topics it may therefore be advisable to invite a team of qualified individuals
to the press conference. Depending on the scenario, this might include for
instance the attending physician, emergency responders who are involved or
representatives of other public authorities.

It is also helpful to provide the press representatives with a good
organisational environment for their professional work. This includes for
example a sufficiently large press room with good acoustics, if possible
equipped with desks, chairs, plug points and wireless network, so that the press
can process the information right away. If the time frame is longer it may be
appropriate to provide catering, or at least drinks and possibly simple meals.
If possible the press and media should be supported by a trained individual who
is permanently present, or who at least can be reached at any time.

## Direct communication – Internet, hotline, social media & apps

As well as press conferences, which enable exclusively face-to-face contact
between the authorities and media representatives, the Internet offers numerous
possibilities for communicating with the public directly. This also requires
advance preparation in order to be able to access the needed infrastructure and
expertise when a crisis occurs. Knowledge of the target group is especially
important for direct communication, to ensure that the right channels of
communication and appropriate language are selected.

For online communication dark sites can be prepared in advance, which can then
be fed with current information and quickly activated when a crisis occurs.

Another form of communication that is very popular with the public, but very
personnel-intensive, are hotlines. Conversely, the most frequently asked
questions also indicate the areas in which there is a particular need for
information, or even where false information is being spread.

The Federal Emergency Information and News App, or [Warning App
NINA](https://www.bbk.bund.de/DE/NINA/Warn-App_NINA.html) for short, was
specially developed to provide early warning of emergencies. Important messages
warning of various hazards, such as the spread of hazardous substances or a
major fire, are sent directly to the mobile phones of the public. Here too
advance risk communication is required in order to publicise the app.

## Specialist communication

In some crises it may be necessary or helpful to conduct targeted specialist
communication with particular target groups. For the public health services, it
would be particularly important to conduct such communication with doctors
working in their area of responsibility. First of all, they too may be subject
to uncertainty which urgently needs to be addressed. Secondly they are important
multipliers who enjoy a high level of trust among the public.

Given their training, medical professionals can be expected to possess both
medical knowledge and the language skills needed to communicate with the public.

## Responsibility and documentation

Administrations usually have press offices with press spokespersons who are
responsible for public relations. The handling of press enquiries from other
authorities, enquiries from institutions and enquiries from the public should be
clearly regulated. In crises, central information points are often set up that
take on part of the public relations work. It is not advisable for experts to
provide information in an unregulated manner. The persons authorised to provide
information should be obliged to document enquiries in a transparent and
structured way. The key persons responsible for public relations must be able at
all times to ascertain what information has already been communicated.

Another thing that is important in communication, particularly in crises, is
documentation, which must guarantee transparency. Clearly defined internal
structures for responsibility and decision-making can facilitate timely and
appropriate implementation via the communication channels. Here it is also
essential to take into account the feedback from the implementing entities, as
well as information from sections of the administration not involved and from
the public.
